# Project description
Mental health conditions, such as depression, affect over 300 million worldwide. Significant sex differences have been observed in the prevalence, clinical manifestations and treatment responses for these disorders, however the exact molecular mechanisms driving this remains unclear. In this study, we leverage single-cell RNA-sequencing data of the developing human hypothlamus to deconvolute sex-differential and cell-type-specific transcriptional mechanisms which may confer susceptibility to mental health conditions. To do this, the data was subsetted to age-match male and female samples as closely as possible. This resulted in a dataset comprising of both sexes grouped into 2 developmental stages (embryonic and fetal). By performing sex-differentially expressed gene (DEG) analysis and pseudotime trajectory analysis, we identified that males and females exhibit differences in the developmental trajectories, which may be driven by sex-differential genes. Interestingly, some sex-DEGs in overall expression and across pseudotime have been linked to stress and mental health conditions, such as NR3C1 and MARCKSL1. Furthermore, by constructing gene regulatory network (GRNs) we further identified key transcription factor "regulons" that drive global gene expression changes in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus, which is integral for coordinating stress responses, and the activity of these regulons were sex-differential and their targets may therefore, be important in driving sex-dimorphisms in mental health. Together, our findings indicate that sex dimorphisms established in development are regulated by a complex transcriptional network and present putative candidate genes that might be driving sex differences in development of the stress brain circuitry and susceptibility to mental health conditions. 

# Data availability
The single-cell RNA-sequencing dataset used in this study was generated for the following paper "Deciphering the spatial-temporal transcriptional landscape of human hypothalamus development" [(Zhou et al., 2022).](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1934590921004574) The data can be downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus (accession number GSE169109).

